<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8' ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC '-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN' 'http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd'>
<html xml:lang='en' xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml'>
    <head>
        <title>Pretty Diff - The difference tool</title>
        <meta content="index, follow" name="robots"/>
        <meta content="Pretty Diff - The difference tool" name="DC.title"/>
        <link href='http://prettydiff.com/documentation.xhtml' rel='canonical' type='application/xhtml+xml'/>
        <link href="http://prettydiff.com/images/favicon.ico" rel="icon" type="image/x-icon"/>
        <link href="http://prettydiff.com/labels.rdf" rel="meta" title="ICRA labels" type="application/rdf+xml"/>
        <meta content='(pics-1.1 "http://www.icra.org/pics/vocabularyv03/" l gen true for "http://prettydiff.com" r (n 0 s 0 v 0 l 0 oa 0 ob 0 oc 0 od 0 oe 0 of 0 og 0 oh 0 c 1) gen true for "http://www.prettydiff.com" r (n 0 s 0 v 0 l 0 oa 0 ob 0 oc 0 od 0 oe 0 of 0 og 0 oh 0 c 1))' http-equiv="pics-Label"/>
        <meta content="Austin Cheney" name="author"/>
        <meta content="Pretty Diff tool can minify, beautify (pretty-print), or diff between minified and beautified code. This tool can even beautify and minify HTML." name="description"/>
        <meta content="Global" name="distribution"/>
        <meta content="en" http-equiv="Content-Language"/>
        <meta content="application/xhtml+xml;charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
        <meta content="blendTrans(Duration=0)" http-equiv="Page-Enter"/>
        <meta content="blendTrans(Duration=0)" http-equiv="Page-Exit"/>
        <meta content="text/css" http-equiv="content-style-type"/>
        <meta content="application/javascript" http-equiv="content-script-type"/>
        <meta content="qL8AV9yjL2-ZFGV9ey6wU3t7pTZdpD4lIetUSiNen7E" name="google-site-verification"/>
        <link href="diffview.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    <body class="white" id="doc">
        <h1><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Pretty Diff</a>
            - Documentation</h1>
        <p id="dcolorScheme"><label class="label" for="colorScheme">Color
            Scheme</label>
            <select id="colorScheme" onchange="pd.colorScheme(this)"><option>Default</option>
                <option>Canvas</option>
                <option>Shadow</option>
                <option selected="selected">White</option></select>
        </p>
        <p>For any questions, comments, requests, or feedback please join the
            <a href="https://groups.google.com/d/forum/pretty-diff">Pretty Diff
                mailing list</a>.
            Find
            <a href="https://github.com/austincheney/Pretty-Diff">Pretty Diff on
                GitHub</a>.</p>
        <p><strong>Since this tool is client-side JavaScript only, meaning that
            execution occurs on the local computer only and resulting output is not
            transmitted or stored, it is safe for processing classified
            information.</strong></p>
        <div id="doc_contents"><h2>Table of Contents</h2>
            <ol>
                <li><a href="#knownissues">Known Issues</a></li>
                <li><a href="#execution">Execution</a></li>
                <li><a href="#parameters">Web Tool URI Parameters</a></li>
                <li><a href="#pdfunction">Pretty Diff Function</a>
                    <ol>
                        <li><a href="#function_overview">Overview</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#function_practices">Practices of Pretty Diff</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#function_properties">Properties of Pretty Diff's One
                            Function Argument</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#function_option">Option String</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#function_io">Input and Output</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#function_nodejs">Executing with Node.js</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#function_wsh">Executing with Windows Script Host</a></li>
                    </ol>
                </li>
                <li><a href="#beautification">Beautification</a>
                    <ol>
                        <li><a href="#beau_javascript">JavaScript</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#beau_css">CSS</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#beau_csv">CSV</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#beau_markup">Markup</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#beau_options">Beautification Options</a></li>
                    </ol>
                </li>
                <li><a href="#minification">Minification</a>
                    <ol>
                        <li><a href="#mini_javascript">JavaScript</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#mini_css">CSS</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#mini_csv">CSV</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#mini_markup">Markup</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#mini_options">Minification Options</a></li>
                    </ol>
                </li>
                <li><a href="#prettydiff">Pretty Diff</a>
                    <ol>
                        <li><a href="#pd_diffcode">Diff Code</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#pd_diffprocess">Diff Process</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#pd_diffoptions">Diff Options</a></li>
                    </ol>
                </li>
                <li><a href="#external">External Resources</a>
                    <ol>
                        <li><a href="#ext_validation">Validation</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#ext_documenation">Documentation</a></li>
                        <li><a href="#ext_editors">Editors</a></li>
                    </ol>
                </li>
                <li><a href="#components">Component Files</a></li>
            </ol>
        </div>
        <div id="knownissues"><h2>Known Issues</h2>
            <ol><li>Webkit browsers, such as Google Chrome and Apple Safari, do not
                support beautification of white space characters or layout in textarea
                elements. As a result the web interface offers a slightly degraded
                experience for these browsers in order to prevent corruption of output.
                Please see these bugs for more experience:
                    <a href="https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=51168">51168</a>
                    and 
                    <a href="https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=90739">90739</a>.</li>
                <li>In the difference report this collection of characters, "$#lt;" and
                    "$#gt;", may appear respectively as, "%#lt;" and "%#gt;", if those
                    collections of characters are interrupted by starting or end of a
                    difference.</li>
                <li>Server-side parsing tags, such as PHP or ASP, are mutilated during
                    markup beautification and markup minification only if placed inside
                    segments of JavaScript or CSS.</li>
                <li>Markup beautification will output flawed data if less than
                    characters, "&lt;", are included into sections of content and not
                    escaped. This error occurs regardless if less than characters embedded
                    within content are quoted or not.</li></ol>
        </div>
        <div id="execution"><h2>Execution</h2>
            <div>
                <ul>
                    <li><h3>Execute in a NodeJS app:</h3>
                        <span class="code">var prettydiff = require("prettydiff"),</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;args
                            &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= {</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;source:
                            "asdf",</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;diff
                            &nbsp;: "asdd",</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lang
                            &nbsp;: "text",</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;},</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;output
                            &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;= prettydiff.api(args);</span>
                    </li>
                    <li><h3>Execute on command line with NodeJS:</h3>
                        <span class="code">>node c:\\prettydiff\\api\\node-local.js
                            source:"c:\mydirectory\myfile.js" readmethod:"file"
                            diff:"c:\myotherfile.js"</span>
                    </li>
                    <li><h3>Execute with WSH:</h3>
                        <span class="code">>cscript prettydiff.wsf /source:"myFile.xml"
                            /mode:"beautify"</span>
                    </li>
                    <li><h3>Execute from JavaScript:</h3>
                        <span class="code">var args &nbsp;&nbsp;= {</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;source:
                            "asdf",</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;diff
                            &nbsp;: "asdd",</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lang
                            &nbsp;: "text",</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;},</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;output =
                            prettydiff(args);</span>
                    </li>
                </ul>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="parameters"><h2>Web Tool URI Parameters</h2>
            <div>
                <ol>
                    <li><strong>c</strong>
                        - This parameter receives the name of a supported color scheme.</li>
                    <li><strong>d</strong>
                        - This parameter receives a URI as a value that points a difference code
                        source. If the value of this URI contains ampersand characters, &amp;,
                        or question mark characters, ?, please escape the ampersands characters
                        to "%26" and the question mark characters to %3F.</li>
                    <li><strong>jscorrect</strong>
                        - This presence of this parameter sets the
                        <em>jscorrect</em>
                        parameter to boolean "true". No value is required.</li>
                    <li><strong>jsscope</strong>
                        - This parameter forcefully applies the jsscope feature of the JSPretty
                        library and does not require a value.</li>
                    <li><strong>l</strong>
                        - This parameter receives a value of
                        <em>markup</em>,
                        <em>html</em>,
                        <em>auto</em>,
                        <em>javascript</em>,
                        <em>js</em>,
                        <em>css</em>,
                        <em>csv</em>, or
                        <em>text</em>. This bypasses all other language settings and
                            determinations thereby forcefully applying the language against the
                            supplied value to this parameter. The value of "html" is identical to
                            the value "markup" except that it forces the option "Presume SGML type
                            HTML" for all modes while "markup" unsets this option. The values
                            "javascript" and "js" are treated equally.</li>
                    <li><strong>m</strong>
                        - This parameter receives a value of
                        <em>beautify</em>,
                        <em>minify</em>, or
                        <em>diff</em>. This parameter sets the mode of the tool.</li>
                    <li><strong>s</strong>
                        - This parameter receives a URI as a value that points a code source. If
                        the value of this URI contains ampersand characters, &amp;, or question
                        mark characters, ?, please escape the ampersands characters to "%26" and
                        the question mark characters to %3F. The tool executes this code
                        automatically on page load for beautify and minify modes, but only for
                        diff mode if a source is provided with the
                        <em>d</em>
                        parameter.</li>
                    <li><strong>codemirror</strong>
                        - If this parameter is present with a value of
                        <em>false</em>
                        the CodeMirror application library will be discarded in favor of HTML
                            textarea elements.</li>
                </ol>
                <p>The parameters are optional and are provided soley for portability.
                    The parameters may occur in any order. Examples:</p>
                <ol>
                    <li><a href="http://prettydiff.com/?l=html&amp;s=http://google.com/&amp;m=beautify">http://prettydiff.com/?l=html&amp;s=http://google.com/&amp;m=beautify</a></li>
                    <li><a href="http://prettydiff.com/?s=http://www.amazon.com/Definitive-XML-Schema-Priscilla-Walmsley/dp/0130655678/ref=sr_1_1%3Fie=UTF8%26qid=1312890971%26sr=8-1&amp;html&amp;m=beautify">http://prettydiff.com/?s=http://www.amazon.com/Definitive-XML-Schema-Priscilla-Walmsley/dp/0130655678/ref=sr_1_1%3Fie=UTF8%26qid=1312890971%26sr=8-1&amp;html&amp;m=beautify</a></li>
                </ol>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="pdfunction"><h2>Pretty Diff Function</h2>
            <div id="function_overview"><h3>Overview</h3>
                <p>Pretty Diff is an application written entirely in JavaScript and
                    expressed as a single function named 'prettydiff()'. This application
                    was originally written as a means to algorithmically difference between
                    two file similar pieces of code regardless of minification. The result
                    is a fast difference engine offering many options that allows access to
                    the world's most advanced markup beautification algorithm.</p>
                <p>While the Pretty Diff application is expressed as a single function
                    it is actually a collection of several components of which many were
                    started by different authors for unrelated projects. Every one of those
                    components that began externally have been heavily modified for either
                    increased processing efficiency, expanded functionality, or JSLint
                    compliance. As a result each of those components must be considered a
                    fork of the originally maintained code that is unique to Pretty
                    Diff.</p>
                <p>The Pretty Diff application is completely isolated from DOM methods
                    with only one exception. This means the prettydiff() function receives
                    all data from its one argument and returns output. At this time the
                    <a href="lib/charDecoder.js">charDecoder.js</a>
                    code is entirely reliant upon DOM access to allow an external application
                    transform character entity references into character literals. The only
                    solution to allow similar functionality without DOM access is to include
                    a character map with the charDecoder function. There are no plans, at
                    this time, to write a JavaScript formulation of the Unicode character
                    map.</p>
                <p>The Pretty Diff function receives input from a single argument that
                    is an object literal containing named properties as discussed in detail
                    a few sections down. If the input is valid Pretty Diff will return an
                    array of two values. The first value is the beautified source code if in
                    "Beautify" mode, the minified source code if in "Minify" mode, or an
                    HTML formatted diff report if in "Pretty Diff" mode. The second output
                    value is an HTML formatted analysis report of the submitted code.</p></div>
            <div id="function_practices"><h3>Practices of Pretty Diff</h3>
                <p>Pretty Diff hopes to encourage conventions of efficiency, but not at
                    cost to recursion, regression testing, or altered functionality. For
                    example consider the situation of minifying markup. In a typical
                    scenario the practice of code minifcation is to remove all code comments
                    and all white space characters not absolutely necessary for syntax
                    interpretation. If the most impactful form of minification is exercised
                    upon markup the functionality of the code is certainly changed. Consider
                    these two examples:</p>
                <ol>
                    <li><span class="code">&lt;p&gt;This is a paragraph with a text field.
                        &lt;input type="text"/&gt;&lt;/p&gt;</span></li>
                    <li><span class="code">&lt;p&gt;This is a paragraph with a text
                        field.&lt;input type="text"/&gt;&lt;/p&gt;</span></li>
                </ol>
                <p>The difference between the two examples above is the difference of a
                    single space character between the period and the input tag. In markup
                    white space characters are tokenized when the code is parsed to output
                    by default, and rarely is this default challenged. Tokenized white space
                    means sequential white space characters are converted to a single space
                    character and then sequential space characters are converted to a single
                    space character. This means the presence of some white space characters
                    are completely trivial, while others are not. A single space character
                    separating words of content is not trivial if it is an isolated space.
                    In the above sample the difference of a space separating the input tag
                    from the content is also not trivial since it alters how tokenized
                    content is interpreted.</p>
                <p>If markup code were fully minified then all white space characters
                    outside of syntax containers, such as tags, would be removed, thereby
                    making the content illegible. Markup can still be correctly minified,
                    but only when rendering of tokenized white space is fully considered.
                    The opposite of this problem is accidental addition of white space
                    characters from flawed beautification schemes. Consider the following
                    two examples:</p>
                <ol>
                    <li><span class="code">&lt;p&gt;This is a statement with a &lt;a
                        href="#"&gt;hyperlink&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/p&gt;</span></li>
                    <li>
                        <span class="code">&lt;p&gt;</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This is a statement with
                            a</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;a
                            href="#"&gt;</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hyperlink</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&lt;/a&gt;</span>
                        <span class="code">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;.</span>
                        <span class="code">&lt;/p&gt;</span></li>
                </ol>
                <p>The differences between the two prior examples is that the second
                    example introduces white space tokens where they do not exist in the
                    first example. In the first example there are no characters between the
                    opening &lt;p&gt; tag and the text or the opening &lt;a&gt; and the text
                    while this is not true of the second example. Therefore these two
                    statements are not similar enough for a logical comparison. A well
                    crafted beautifier, or pretty printer, will take these differences into
                    account so far as to alter the entirety of a code base for easier
                    reading but not at the cost of manipulating how the code is parsed by a
                    given interpreter.</p>
                <p>Code must never be minified if it cannot be automatically recovered
                    into an easily readable form and must never be beautified if such
                    beautification changes how the code is parsed. This is the importance of
                    regression. The most extreme form of minification is referred to
                    obfuscation. Obfuscation removes all code comments and all white space
                    characters not absolutely required for syntax compliance, but goes one
                    step further and changes all variable and command names to the fewest
                    available character length. Pretty Diff considers the practice of
                    obfuscation to be harmful as its practice eliminates the possibility of
                    regression. Without the possibility for regression recursive practices
                    are improbable.</p>
                <p>An instantiation of a pattern where the pattern's presence is
                    available in the given instance without regard for multiplication is
                    said to be idempotent. A recursive practice is the ability replicate an
                    action where the replication does not harm the potential of further
                    replication, or the idempotent nature of a pattern, upon or resulting
                    from that action. In the case of Pretty Diff code that begins unminified
                    should be capable of being minified, beautified, minified again, and so
                    on without harm or difference to the functional integrity of the
                    supplied code. Any process that prevents such recursive practices, such
                    as obfuscation, are harmful and must be avoided.</p>
                <p>Comments are the regression exception. There is no way to efficiently
                    reduce code while retaining comments and documentation. Pretty Diff
                    <strong>strongly</strong>
                    recommends that documentation be separated from production code into
                    either a redundant development version or into a separated documentation
                    archive so that it can be preserved apart from the production code.</p>
                <p>There is one extremely limited exception to functional interference
                    observed by Pretty Diff. The Cascading Style Sheets language provides a
                    syntax and vocabulary that are limited and fully known. Therefore
                    functional changes can, and are, supplied to CSS code during
                    minification because in this one narrow instance there is no harm to
                    regression. Superior minification can be performed by supplying minor
                    functional changes to the code which be easily and intelligently
                    reversed without error or prior knowledge of the code sample.</p></div>
            <div id="function_properties"><h3>Properties of Pretty Diff's One
                Function Argument</h3>
                <p><strong>Please note:</strong>
                    As of 19 June 2011 Pretty Diff application no longer accepts formal
                    function arguments. It only accepts a single argument, named
                    <em>api</em>, which is an object literal that stores the application
                        options as the following object properties.</p>
                <ol>
                    <li>comments - This property determines whether comments should be
                        indented. This property is only used if the source property is set to
                        <em>beautify</em>. Acceptable values are:
                        <strong>indent</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>noindent</strong>.</li>
                    <li>conditional - Use this argument to retain conditional HTML comments
                        used by Internet Explorer in minification of HTML. This property takes
                        boolean types and defaults to false.</li>
                    <li>content - This property determines if string literals in JavaScript
                        and content in markup should be normalized to a value of
                        <em>text</em>
                        prior to a diff operation. This property is only used if mode property is
                        set to
                        <em>"diff"</em>. Acceptable values are boolean
                        <strong>false</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>true</strong>.</li>
                    <li>context - The value of this property stores a number or empty string
                        so as to trigger the
                        <em>Context Size</em>
                        diff option. This property is only used if mode property is set to
                        <em>"diff"</em>.</li>
                    <li>correct - The
                        <em>correct</em>
                        property is a limited attempt to automatically correct certain stylistic
                        code problems that JSLint complains about. This property accepts a
                        boolean type and defaults to
                        <em>false</em>.</li>
                    <li>csvchar - This property stores the string value used as a data
                        separator for the
                        <em>"csv"</em>
                        language. Any string is accepted, but if value of lang property is not
                        set to
                        <em>"csv"</em>
                        the value of this property is ignored.</li>
                    <li>diff - The string value of this property stores the data that is to
                        be differenced against value of the source property in a diff operation.
                        Any string is accepted, but this property is only used if the mode
                        property is set to
                        <em>"diff"</em>.</li>
                    <li>diffcomments - Use this argument to retain code comments so that
                        code and comments can be compared by the diff process. This property
                        takes boolean types and defaults to false.</li>
                    <li>difflabel - The value of this property sets a label describing the
                        value of diff property. Any string is accepted.</li>
                    <li>diffview - This property determines if the diff report should be
                        expressed is a side-by-side comparison or a single inline view. This
                        property is only used if mode property is set to
                        <em>"diff"</em>. Acceptable values are:
                        <strong>"sidebyside"</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>"inline"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>force_indentation - This property determines if every piece of code
                        and content must be indented or if the source should be beautified
                        according to its semantics so that white space tokens are not added or
                        removed. This property accepts boolean values and defaults to
                        <strong>"false"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>html - This property determiens if the application must presume
                        markup input to be an SGML form of the HTML language. This property is
                        only used if lang property is set to
                        <em>"markup"</em>. Acceptable values are
                        <strong>"html-no"</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>"html-yes"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>inchar - This property stores the character literal used for an
                        indentation. Any string is accepted. A single indentation is the result
                        of this value repeated
                        <em>insize</em>
                        times.</li>
                    <li>indent - This property sets the style of indentation during
                        JavaScript beautification. The default value
                        <strong>"knr"</strong>
                        sets a JSLint compliant beautification scheme and the other value
                        <strong>"allman"</strong>
                        puts opening curly braces on their own line.</li>
                    <li>inlevel - The inlevel property pads JavaScript beautification with
                        additional indentation. This property accepts a number and defaults to
                        0.</li>
                    <li>insize - This property stores the character length of an indention.
                        An integer or string containing an integer is accepted. If anything else
                        is supplied this property defaults to a value of
                        <strong>"4"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>jscorrect - This JavaScript only property determines if sloppiness
                        should corrected for in the beautified output. Semicolons and curly
                        braces are added where missing. Operators "++" and "--" are converted to
                        "+= 1" provided they are not adjacent to arithmetic or arguments of a
                        method. "new Object()" and "new Array()" are converted to "{}" and "[]".
                        This argument accepts a boolean value and defaults to "false".</li>
                    <li>jsscope - This property, if provided a value of boolean true, will
                        produce HTML output for JavaScript beautification that colors variables
                        based upon their scope of declaration. This feature highlights
                        inheritance, scope depth, and closure.</li>
                    <li>lang - This property tells the diff program which language it is
                        receiving. Acceptable values are:
                        <strong>"auto"</strong>,
                        <strong>"javascript"</strong>,
                        <strong>"css"</strong>,
                        <strong>"csv"</strong>,
                        <strong>"markup"</strong>, and
                        <strong>"text"</strong>. The value "auto" allows the application to
                        determine between CSS, JavaScript, and Markup without human effort.</li>
                    <li>mode - This property determiens the operation to be performed.
                        Acceptable values are:
                        <strong>"beautify"</strong>,
                        <strong>"minify"</strong>, and
                        <strong>"diff"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>quote - This property determines if single quote characters should
                        be converted to double quote characters prior to a diff operation. This
                        property is only used if mode property is set to
                        <em>"diff"</em>. Acceptable values are boolean
                        <strong>false</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>true</strong>.</li>
                    <li>preserve - This property, if provided a boolean value of false, will
                        remove all empty lines from JavaScript beautification.</li>
                    <li>semicolon - This property determines if semicolon characters at the
                        end of a line should be removed prior to a diff operation. This property
                        is only used if mode property is set to
                        <em>"diff"</em>. Acceptable values are boolean
                        <strong>false</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>true</strong>.</li>
                    <li>source - The string value of this property is code that is to be
                        beautified, minified, or represents the base text in a diff operation.
                        Any string data is accepted.</li>
                    <li>sourcelabel - The value of this property sets a label describing the
                        value of source property in the diff report. Any string is
                        accepted.</li>
                    <li>space - This property, provided a boolean value of false, will
                        remove the space following a function keyword for anonymous functions in
                        JavaScript beautification.</li>
                    <li>style - This property determines whether CSS and JavaScript code
                        should be indented according to the surrounding markup or if they should
                        be indented starting from 0. This property is only used if lang property
                        is set to
                        <em>"markup"</em>
                        and mode property is set to
                        <em>"beautify"</em>
                        or 
                        <em>"diff"</em>. Acceptable values are
                        <strong>"indent"</strong>
                        and 
                        <strong>"noindent"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>topcoms - This property determines whether minification should
                        ignore comments at the top of JavaScript or CSS input before any code.
                        This property is only used if the mode property is set to
                        <em>"minify"</em>. It accepts values of boolean
                        <strong>"true"</strong>
                        or 
                        <strong>"false"</strong>.</li>
                    <li>wrap - This argument accepts numeric values only and defaults to 0.
                        The wrap argument determines how many columns text content may be in a
                        markup document before wrapping onto a new line. The value 0 disables
                        text wrapping.</li>
                </ol>
            </div>
            <div id="function_option"><h3>Option String</h3>
                <p>The Pretty Diff option string is similar in convention to the JSLint
                    option string. Pretty Diff will only process the first option string it
                    encounters, but it will search the diff code if the option cannot be
                    found in the source code. In order for the option string to be
                    recognized it must start with
                    <strong>/*prettydiff.com</strong>
                    and end with
                    <strong>*/</strong>. The options are listed in this string separated by
                    commas as a colon separated name value pair. The options match the exact
                    value definition for the Pretty Diff application properties above and
                    options that allow abstract values must have their values enclosed in
                    either single or double quotes. The options can be listed in any order.
                    To prevent possible corruption of the option string it should be
                    separated from other code comments or content. These are examples of
                    appropriate option strings:<ul>
                        <li>/*prettydiff.com api.mode:beautify, api.lang:javascript,
                            api.inchar:"abc"*/</li>
                        <li>&lt;!--/*prettydiff.com api.mode: beautify, api.lang: javascript,
                            api.inchar: "abc", api.html: html-yes */--&gt;</li></ul>
                </p>
            </div>
            <div id="function_io"><h3>Input and Output</h3>
                <p>The prettydiff function accepts all code input from JavaScript
                    variables supplied to the function's source property and diff property.
                    The code supplied to the diff property is used only during diff
                    operations and is otherwise ignored.</p>
                <p>The function outputs an array of two indexes. The first array index
                    is always the processed data and the second array index contains some
                    metadata. In the case of the "beautify" and "minify" operations the
                    first index of the output array is the processed source code as text and
                    the second array index is the code report, as seen generated on the
                    client side tool, formatted as HTML. The output from the diff operation
                    returns an HTML table of the actual diff output as the first array index
                    and a some minor metadata about the number of errors in the second array
                    index with both indexes formatted as HTML and neither comprising a
                    complete HTML document. To form the diff output of the prettydiff
                    function into a single HTML document I typically supply the following
                    extra code:</p>
                <ol><li>output = prettydiff(...);</li>
                    <li>heading = '&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?&gt;&lt;!DOCTYPE
                        html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
                        "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"&gt;&lt;html
                        xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
                        xml:lang="en"&gt;&lt;head&gt;&lt;title&gt;Pretty
                        Diff&lt;/title&gt;&lt;link rel="canonical" href="http://prettydiff.com/"
                        type="application/xhtml+xml"/&gt;&lt;meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
                        content="application/xhtml+xml;charset=UTF-8"/&gt;&lt;meta name="robots"
                        content="index, follow"/&gt;&lt;meta name="DC.title" content="Pretty
                        Diff - The difference tool"/&gt;&lt;link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon"
                        href="http://prettydiff.com/images/favicon.ico"/&gt;&lt;link rel="meta"
                        href="http://prettydiff.com/labels.rdf" type="application/rdf+xml"
                        title="ICRA labels"/&gt;&lt;meta http-equiv="pics-Label"
                        content='(pics-1.1 "http://www.icra.org/pics/vocabularyv03/" l gen true
                        for "http://prettydiff.com" r (n 0 s 0 v 0 l 0 oa 0 ob 0 oc 0 od 0 oe 0
                        of 0 og 0 oh 0 c 1) gen true for "http://www.prettydiff.com" r (n 0 s 0
                        v 0 l 0 oa 0 ob 0 oc 0 od 0 oe 0 of 0 og 0 oh 0 c 1))'/&gt;&lt;meta
                        name="author" content="Austin Cheney"/&gt;&lt;meta name="description"
                        content="Pretty Diff tool can minify, beautify, or diff between minified
                        and beautified code.This tool can even beautify and minify
                        HTML."/&gt;&lt;meta name="distribution" content="Global"/&gt;&lt;meta
                        http-equiv="Page-Enter" content="blendTrans(Duration=0)"/&gt;&lt;meta
                        http-equiv="Page-Exit" content="blendTrans(Duration=0)"/&gt;&lt;meta
                        http-equiv="content-style-type" content="text/css"/&gt;&lt;meta
                        http-equiv="content-script-type" content="text/javascript"/&gt;&lt;meta
                        name="google-site-verification"
                        content="qL8AV9yjL2-ZFGV9ey6wU3t7pTZdpD4lIetUSiNen7E"/&gt;&lt;link
                        rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"
                        href="http://prettydiff.com/diffview.css"
                        media="all"/&gt;&lt;/head&gt;&lt;body&gt;&lt;h1&gt;Pretty Diff - The
                        difference tool&lt;/h1&gt;&lt;span class="clear"&gt;&lt;/span&gt;&lt;div
                        id="diffoutput"&gt;';</li>
                    <li>return heading + output[1] + "&lt;/div&gt;" + output[0] +
                        "&lt;/body&gt;&lt;/html&gt;";</li></ol>
            </div>
            <div id="function_nodejs"><h3>Executing with
                    <a href="http://nodejs.org/">Node.js</a></h3>
                <p>Node.js is a command line run time. Node.js execution could be the
                    result of a one-time execution or part of a scripted automation process.
                    To execute the prettydiff function with Node.js the following code needs
                    to be added after the prettydiff function. Nothing else needs to occur
                    for compatibility or integration with Node.js.</p>
                <p><code>if(typeof exports!=="string"){exports.api=function(x){"use
                    strict";return prettydiff(x);};}</code></p>
                <p>Some Node.js API files are supplied as part of the Pretty Diff
                    project. An actively maintained API for use on the local file system is
                    supplied as
                    <a href="api/node-local.js">api/node-local.js</a>. An API for executing
                    Pretty Diff as a service is also supplied, but is no longer maintained
                    at
                    <a href="api/node-service.js">api/node-service.js</a>.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="function_wsh"><h3>Executing with
                    <a href="http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/9bbdkx3k%28v=VS.85%29.aspx">Windows
                        Script Host</a>
                    (WSH)</h3>
                <p>Windows Script Host allows for a JavaScript run time in Windows
                    environments from a command line with output directly returned to the
                    command line or in a debugger window. To execute JavaScript with WSH a
                    file is needed to supply the JavaScript function call, pass arguments
                    from command line into a JavaScript compatible format, and to request
                    dependencies.</p>
                <p>An actively maintained API is provided at
                    <a href="api/prettydiff.wsf">api/prettydiff.wsf</a>. A WSF file follows
                    basic XML syntax and may allow multiple operations of different
                    languages to execute in tandem so long as each operation is confined to
                    a
                    <em>job</em>
                    tag. The
                    <em>named</em>
                    elements in the example file are used to intercept arguments supplied via
                    command line.</p>
                <p>The example file would be operated for HTML compatibility using the
                    following command:
                    <code>cscript prettydiff.wsf /source:"my_source_file.js" /html:true
                        /mode:"beautify"</code></p>
                <p>Writing the output of a WSH task into a file would require an
                    additional ActiveX instruction in the wsh.wsf file or would require the
                    automation of script execution in the context of the PowerShell
                    language.</p></div>
        </div>
        <div id="beautification"><h2>Beautification</h2>
            <div id="beau_javascript"><h3>JavaScript</h3>
                <p>JavaScript beautification uses
                    <a href="lib/jspretty.js">jspretty</a>
                    function. This code is used in accordance with licensing provided in
                    documentation embedded within the original code.</p>
                <p>JavaScript is beautified in accordance with conventions expressed by
                    JSLint beautification scheme. This essentially means that spaces are
                    added after commas, object contents are indented, and a new line is
                    added after each statement termination and object closing.</p>
                <p>jspretty now warns on unnecessary use of the
                    <em>new</em>
                    keyword, which is any use except immediately preceeding one of these
                    global objects:</p>
                <blockquote>"Date", "RegExp", "Error", "XMLHttpRequest", "FileReader",
                    "ActiveXObject", "DataView", "ArrayBuffer", "Proxy", "DOMParser",
                    "ParallelArray", "Int8Array", "Uint8Array", "Int16Array", "Uint16Array",
                    "Int32Array", "Uint32Array", "Float32Array", "Float64Array", "Canvas",
                    "CustomAnimation", "FadeAnimation", "Flash", "FormField", "Frame",
                    "HotKey", "Image", "MenuItem", "MoveAnimation", "Point", "Rectangle",
                    "ResizeAnimation", "RotateAnimation", "ScrollBar", "Shadow", "SQLite",
                    "Text", "TextArea", "Timer", "URL", "Web", "Window"</blockquote>
                <h4>Summary</h4>
                <p>An unassigned anonymous function creates the summary report and
                    assigns its output to a variable named
                    <em>summary</em>. Variable
                    <em>summary</em>
                    is not provided a scope by jspretty.js, so it must be provided a scope by
                    a consuming function or it will become an implied global, or an
                    undeclared variable error in strict mode. It is intended to be provided
                    to jspretty as closure so that it can access the interior of jspretty
                    and be accessed outside of jspretty.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="beau_css"><h3>CSS</h3>
                <p>CSS beautification uses
                    <a href="lib/csspretty.js">csspretty</a>
                    function. A minimalist parser that is capable of quick extension and deep
                    analysis.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="beau_csv"><h3>CSV</h3>
                <p>CSV typically stands for
                    <em>comma separated values</em>, but in this tool it stands for
                    character separated values. The
                    <a href="lib/csvbeauty.js">csvbeauty</a>
                    function takes a sequence of characters and splits the input upon that
                    supplied sequence onto new lines. Prior existing line breaks, if they
                    were quoted, are converted to a space contained by braces:
                    <em>{ }</em>. Unquote line breaks are converted into two simultaneous
                    line breaks. If the final character(s) match the user supplied character
                    sequence, after charDecoder processing, then those characters are
                    converted into
                    <em>{|}</em>
                    so that csvmin will know a character sequence must exist at the extreme
                    end of input. Escaped double quote characters, escaped using the formal
                    CSV method by immediately preceeding the characters with an extra double
                    quote character, are converted in a single double quote character to
                    improve ledgibility.</p>
                <p>CSV beautification uses
                    <a href="lib/charDecoder.js">charDecoder</a>
                    to decode Unicode character entities. The charDecode function accepts any
                    combination of HTML decimal Unicode entities and Unicode hexidecimal
                    entities. HTML decimal entities must begin with an ampersand and pound
                    character '&amp;#', be immediately followed with between one and six
                    decimals, and be immediately terminated by a semicolon ';'. Examples of
                    accepted HTML entities are:</p>
                <ul><li>&amp;#9;</li>
                    <li>&amp;#37;</li>
                    <li>&amp;#10279;</li></ul>
                <p>The Unicode hexidecimal entities must begin with a lowercase u and
                    plus character 'u+', be immediately followed by a four or five digit
                    hexidecimal value, and be immediately terminated by a plus character.
                    Hexidecimal values smaller than four digits must be padded with 0
                    characters necessary to achieve four digits. Examples of accepted
                    Unicode entities are:</p>
                <ul><li>u+0009+</li>
                    <li>u+003c+</li>
                    <li>u+1037a+</li></ul>
                <p>Please be aware that charDecode is reliant upon the interpreting
                    application's HTML character rendering engine to map entity values to
                    character maps, which means if the browser does not support the entity
                    supplied the browser will return a generic character marker instead of
                    the intended character. The content will then be separated in accordance
                    to the rendered sequence value, which means a generic character marker
                    will be used in the separation instead of the character referrenced by
                    the supplied entity. In summary, if your browser has limited support for
                    Unicode characters you must expect equally limited results when using
                    entity references.</p></div>
            <div id="beau_markup"><h3>Markup</h3>
                <p>Markup beautification uses the
                    <a href="lib/markup_beauty.js">markup_beauty</a>
                    function of the application. This function operates upon a pattern based
                    logic of referrential integrity. This means decisions are made through
                    exposure to the pattern as established so far. Unfortunately, this
                    requires defined logic to consider all possible combinations of
                    patterns. At this point the beautification appears to work for more than
                    99.9% of pattern combinations, but undefined combinations are
                    continually being discovered. If an error in my logic is discovered
                    please
                    <a href="mailto:austin.cheney@us.army.mil">contact me</a>
                    so that I am supply you with a corrected application.</p>
                <p>The markup beautification is based upon syntax conventions only and
                    absolutely not upon vocabulary. The two exceptions are that the contents
                    of a script tag are presumed to be JavaScript if the tag does not
                    contain a type attribute or the type attribute contains one of these
                    values: text/javascript, text/ecmascript, application/javascript,
                    application/x-javascript, application/ecmascript. When the contents of a
                    script tag are presumed as JavaScript they are beautified accordingly.
                    The contents of a style tag are presumed to be CSS if the tag contains a
                    type attribute with a value of text/css or if the type attribute is not
                    present, and those contents are beautified as CSS. The presumed CSS and
                    JavaScript do not inherit indentation from the markup. Since the
                    beautification is not based upon vocabulary any language that uses angle
                    brackets for delimiters should work assuming the conditions of the next
                    paragraph are met. The supplied markup does not have to be valid or well
                    formed by any means.</p>
                <p>Content in the markup is represented by whether or not it begins or
                    ends with any whitespace. If content does begin and/or end with
                    whitespace then new line characters are added and the content is
                    indented. This means tags that butt up directly to content are then
                    treated as an extension of that content and are not indented. Singleton
                    tags are expected to be terminated as XML singleton tags, which means a
                    forward slash character prior to its closing angle bracket. If a
                    singleton tag is not properly closed the beautifier believes the tag to
                    be a start tag, which expects an end tag. Singleton tags may represent
                    an indication of content in the form of media or form controls, and so
                    they are indented in the same manner as content.</p>
                <p>PHP tags are expected to open with "<em>&lt;?php</em>" and XML
                    parsing declarations are expected to open with "<em>&lt;?xml</em>".
                    Tags that begin with only "<em>&lt;?</em>"
                    are not supported, and so they are believed to be start tags missing a
                    closing tag. This unsupported convention is no longer supported by PHP,
                    even if tolerated, and will generate errors to an XML parser. I don't
                    support this and neither should you.</p>
                <p>Start tags expect to receive an end tag. End tags will be indented
                    exactly like their starting pair unless they are directly next to
                    content and the same is true for start tags. The beautification logic is
                    smart enough to compensate and correct itself in adjustment for start
                    tags or end tags that are not indented due to content.</p>
                <p>The
                    <a href="lib/markup_beauty.js">markup_beauty</a>
                    function also supports nested tags. Some server side processing languages
                    use an XML base tag syntax for application processing, such as JSTL, and
                    allow the direct embedding of HTML and XML tags directly. This following
                    tag is example of something that can be beautified:
                    <em>&lt;c:out value="&lt;strong&gt;variable text
                        output&lt;/strong&gt;"/&gt;</em>.
                    The only limitation is that the nested tags must be quoted in either
                    double or single quotes.</p>
                <p>On 12 April 2011 support was added for complex nested SGML tags. This
                    support is limited to the points of conflict with the terse syntax
                    requirements of XML. In the case of such conflicts markup_beauty chooses
                    to comply with XML syntax in opposition to SGML flexibility. This is of
                    particular concern to tags that use the "<em>&lt;?</em>"
                    syntax.</p>
                <h4>Markup Summary</h4>
                <p>The markup_beauty function contains, at its end, an unassigned
                    anonymous function that creates the summary report and assigns its
                    output to a variable named
                    <em>summary</em>. Variable
                    <em>summary</em>
                    is not provided a scope by markup_beauty, because it is meant to be
                    supplied as a closure to markup_beauty. This summary variable must be
                    provided a scope by the consuming application or it will become an
                    implied global, or an undeclared variable error in strict mode.</p>
                <p>The markup_summary creates a report of the number of parts comprising
                    the markup, the weight of each of those parts, and a score using a math
                    formula to compute a performance rating that reenforces reliance upon
                    structure and elaboration of content. This function also displays each
                    HTML element making a HTTP request.</p></div>
            <div id="beau_options"><h3>Beautification Options</h3>
                <p>The
                    <em>Indentation Size</em>
                    is merely a multiplier of the specified indentation character. Each
                    component of the total application computes indentation from multiplying
                    the indentation size by the indendation character independently so that
                    the components may be used without the others and with minimal or no
                    modification.</p>
                <p>The
                    <em>Indentation Characters</em>
                    option allows a choice of space, tab, new line, or a string of text
                    characters from the HTML tool. The code will literally allow anything
                    that can be expressed as a character or series of characters.</p>
                <p>The
                    <em>Indent Comments</em>
                    option determines if comments should be indented in accordance to the
                    neighboring code or if comments should not be indented at all.</p>
                <p>The
                    <em>Indent Style/Script</em>
                    option is only available for markup beautification. This option
                    determines if the contents of style or script should be indented to
                    match the indentation of their parent tag or if their indentation should
                    begin from the left.</p>
                <p>The
                    <em>Presume SGML type HTML</em>
                    option is only available for the markup type of code. When this option is
                    enabled all tag names that are "presumed" as singleton tags in HTML 4.01
                    are treated as singletons regardless of their syntax.</p>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="minification"><h2>Minification</h2>
            <div id="mini_javascript"><h3>JavaScript</h3>
                <p>The custom built
                    <a href="lib/jspretty.js">csspretty</a>
                    library is used to analyze and minify JavaScript code. It is also capable
                    of providing some minor auto-correction, such as inserting missing
                    semicolons and curly braces.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="mini_css"><h3>CSS</h3>
                <p>The custom built
                    <a href="lib/csspretty.js">csspretty</a>
                    library is used to analyze and minify CSS code.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="mini_csv"><h3>CSV</h3>
                <p>CSV typically stands for
                    <em>comma separated values</em>, but in this tool it stands for
                    character separated values. The
                    <a href="lib/csvmin.js">csvmin</a>
                    function reverts all changes inflicted by the
                    <a href="lib/csvbeauty.js">csvbeauty</a>
                    function.</p>
                <p>CSV beautification uses
                    <a href="lib/charDecoder.js">charDecoder</a>
                    to decode Unicode character entities. The charDecode function accepts any
                    combination of HTML decimal Unicode entities and Unicode hexidecimal
                    entities. HTML decimal entities must begin with an ampersand and pound
                    character '&amp;#', be immediately followed with between one and six
                    decimals, and be immediately terminated by a semicolon ';'. Examples of
                    accepted HTML entities are:</p>
                <ul><li>&amp;#9;</li>
                    <li>&amp;#37;</li>
                    <li>&amp;#10279;</li></ul>
                <p>The Unicode hexidecimal entities must begin with a lowercase u and
                    plus character 'u+', be immediately followed by a four or five digit
                    hexidecimal value, and be immediately terminated by a plus character.
                    Hexidecimal values smaller than four digits must be padded with 0
                    characters necessary to achieve four digits. Examples of accepted
                    Unicode entities are:</p>
                <ul><li>u+0009+</li>
                    <li>u+003c+</li>
                    <li>u+1037a+</li></ul>
                <p>Please be aware that charDecoder is reliant upon the interpreting
                    application's HTML character rendering engine to map entity values to
                    character maps, which means if the browser does not support the entity
                    supplied the browser will return a generic character marker instead of
                    the intended character. The content will then be separated in accordance
                    to the rendered sequence value, which means a generic character marker
                    will be used in the separation instead of the character referrenced by
                    the supplied entity. In summary, if your browser has limited support for
                    Unicode characters you must expect equally limited results when using
                    entity references. csvmin does not revert any changes supplied by the
                    charDecoder function.</p></div>
            <div id="mini_markup"><h3>Markup</h3>
                <p>Markup is minified using
                    <a href="lib/markupmin.js">markupmin</a>. This function does little more
                    than tokenize a run of whitespace characters into a single space
                    character and scrubbing of comments. It does, however, preserve
                    whitespace inside ASP and PHP tags and preserve SSI tags. It will also
                    assume the contents of a script tag are JavaScript and minify them
                    according, and also assumes the contents of style tags are CSS and
                    minifies them as such.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="mini_options"><h3>Minification Options</h3>
                <p>The
                    <em>Presume SGML type HTML</em>
                    option is only available for the markup type of code. When this option is
                    enabled all tag names that are "presumed" as singleton tags in HTML 4.01
                    are treated as singletons regardless of their syntax. The
                    <em>conditional</em>
                    argument accepts boolean types and defaults to a value of false. The
                    conditional argument allows the output to retain HTML conditional
                    comments supported by Internet Explorer if the value is true.</p>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="prettydiff"><h2>Pretty Diff</h2>
            <div id="pd_diffcode"><h3>Diff Code</h3>
                <p>The diff engine uses
                    <a href="lib/diffview.js">diffview</a>. Originally by Snowtide
                    Informatics Systems. diffview is almost entirely rewritten from scratch
                    so that JavaScript arrays are used to store the dynamic output instead
                    of DOM objects. This change has result in a 3.5x faster response rate.
                    charcomp is the function used to highlight per character
                    differences.</p>
            </div>
            <div id="pd_diffprocess"><h3>Diff Process</h3>
                <p>JavaScript code is beautified with
                    <a href="lib/jspretty.js">jspretty</a>
                    and then compared. CSV is first minified with
                    <a href="lib/csvmin.js">csvmin</a>
                    and then beautified with
                    <a href="lib/csvbeauty.js">csvbeauty</a>. CSS is beautified with
                    <a href="lib/csspretty.js">csspretty</a>
                    and then compared. Markup is beautified using
                    <a href="lib/markup_beauty.js">markup-beautify</a>. Plain text is diffed
                    without any minification or beautification. If code that needs to be
                    compared that is not compatible with the other processes then use the
                    plain text mode.</p>
                <p>Only after the automated beautification does the diff process begin.
                    The difflib finds differences per line and sends its results, as an
                    array of numeric values where to look in the code, over the diffview.
                    Diffview takes the opcodes supplied by difflib and then builds an array
                    where the code is pumped into HTML table cell code. Once the view is
                    completely built it is immediately inserted into the page using
                    innerHTML. You cannot see the output at this point because it is set to
                    display none until charcomp finishes.</p>
                <p>charcomp finds the table cells with a class of "replace" and only
                    works on those cells. Before performing any comparison it converts
                    non-breaking space references into actual spaces to reduce processing
                    requirements, and converts angle brackets into entity references, and
                    converts entity references for quotes into actual quotes. In JavaScript
                    a single quote compares to true against a double quote even if both are
                    string literals, so I invented character references that I could convert
                    back to quotes within the context of the comparison function so that
                    they actually do become string literals that comparable. Once a
                    difference is located it is wrapped in an em tag.</p></div>
            <div id="pd_diffoptions"><h3>Diff Options</h3>
                <p><em>Print or Save Output</em>
                    option dumps the HTML output as raw text into a textarea. Please copy the
                    text out of this new textarea at the bottom of the page and paste it
                    into a new text file to be saved with the file extension of 'html'. If
                    the output is to be printed please use landscape instead of portrait
                    orientation for the paper in order to achieve the best results.</p>
                <p>The
                    <em>Context Size</em>
                    option provides padding to the lines of code differences with lines of
                    code that are not different. This option expects to receive a number or
                    empty value only. If anything else is entered an empty value will be
                    processed. An empty value negates this option by returning all supplied
                    code with differences highlighted. If there is no differences are
                    discovered this option is negated.</p>
                <p><em>JavaScript Toleration</em>
                    is exactly the same as described in Minification Options above.
                    <em>Indentation Size</em>
                    are exactly the same as described in Beautification Options above.
                    <em>Indentation Characters</em>,
                    <em>Indent Style/Script</em>, and
                    <em>Presume SGML type HTML</em>
                    are exactly the same as described in Beautification Options above.</p>
                <p>The
                    <em>Diff View Type</em>
                    option provides two choices. The first choice, Side by Side View, reports
                    the output into two columns that display a side by side comparison of
                    the differences. The second choice, Inline View, displays the output
                    into a single column so that the differences can be seen in a vertical
                    comparison.</p>
                <p><em>Diff Quotes</em>
                    is an option to normalize all single quote characters, &#39;, to double
                    quote characters, &#34;. This option is off by default and it functions
                    after input code is beautified and before diff operation execution.</p>
                <p><em>Trailing Semicolons</em>
                    is an option to remove semicolon characters just before a new line
                    character. This option is off by default and it functions after input
                    code is beautified and before diff operation execution.</p>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="external"><h2>External Resources</h2>
            <div id="ext_validation"><h3>Validation</h3>
                <ul>
                    <li><a href="http://jslint.com/">JSLint</a>
                        is recommend for JavaScript as the most complete source of automated
                        JavaScript validation.</li>
                    <li><a href="http://jshint.com/">JSHint</a>
                        is a fork of JSLint.</li>
                    <li><a href="http://validator.w3.org/">W3C Markup Validation Service</a>
                        is recommended as the most complete validation source for all variants of
                        (X)HTML.</li>
                    <li><a href="http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/">W3C CSS Validation
                        Service</a>
                        is recommended as the most accurate CSS validation application.</li>
                </ul>
            </div>
            <div id="ext_documentation"><h3>Documentation</h3>
                <ul>
                    <li><a href="http://naturaldocs.org/">Natural Docs</a>
                        is a tool for automatically grabbing, archiving, sorting, and formatting
                        code documentation.</li>
                    <li><a href="http://openjsan.org/">JSAN</a>
                        is an online archive of JavaScript application modules and documentation
                        schemes.</li>
                </ul>
            </div>
            <div id="ext_editors"><h3>Editors</h3>
                <ul>
                    <li><a href="http://www.miscutil.com/apps/xmleditor/">aws XML Editor</a>
                        is an XML tree viewer and editor written in JavaScript and proxy for
                        conversion to JSON.</li>
                    <li><a href="http://notepad-plus-plus.org/">Notepad ++</a>
                        is an open source code editor that is light weight and supports syntax
                        highlighting for more than 30 languages.</li>
                </ul>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="components"><h2>Components Files</h2>
            <table summary="components, authors, and dates of modification"><caption>A
                list of code components, author information, and dates of
                revision.</caption>
                <thead>
                    <tr><th>Component</th>
                        <th>Author(s)</th>
                        <th>Summary</th>
                        <th>Revised</th></tr>
                </thead>
                <tbody>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/charDecoder.js">charDecoder.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>The function that decodes Unicode character entities for
                            <a href="csvbeauty.js">csvbeauty.js</a>
                            and 
                            <a href="csvmin.js">csvmin.js</a>.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="cm/codemirror.css">codemirror.css</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://codemirror.com/">CodeMirror team</a></td>
                        <td>CSS for the CodeMirror editor.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="cm/codemirror.js">codemirror.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://codemirror.com/">CodeMirror team</a></td>
                        <td>JavaScript for the CodeMirror editor.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/csspretty.js">csspretty.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>CSS parser.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/csvbeauty.js">csvbeauty.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>The function that beautifies character sequence values.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/csvmin.js">csvmin.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>The function that minifies character sequence values.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="diffview.css">diffview.css</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>The CSS that powers everything to do with the form, diff output, and
                            this documentation.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/diffview.js">diffview.js</a></td>
                        <td>
                            <span><a href="https://github.com/cemerick/jsdifflib">Chas Emerick</a>
                                - Original</span>
                            <span><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a>
                                - Major Revision</span>
                        </td>
                        <td>Builds the HTML diff output.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="documentation.xhtml">documentation.xhtml</a></td>
                        <td>
                            <span><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></span>
                            <span><a href="http://www.webhostinghub.com/support/es/misc/">Maria
                                Ramos</a>
                                - 
                                <a href="http://www.webhostinghub.com/support/es/misc/diff-documentacion">Espa&#241;ol</a></span>
                        </td>
                        <td>This documentation page.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="api/dom.js">dom.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>A supplemental JavaScript file providing DOM access and interaction
                            with the web tool.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/jspretty.js">jspretty.js</a></td>
                        <td>
                            <span><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></span>
                            <span><a href="http://g6auc.me.uk/">Harry Whitfield</a>
                                - QA support</span>
                        </td>
                        <td>Beautifies JavaScript code.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/markup_beauty.js">markup_beauty.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>Beautifies markup code.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="lib/markupmin.js">markupmin.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>Minifies markup code.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="api/node-local.js">node-local.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>An API for processing the local command line JavaScript with
                            Node.js</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="api/node-service.js">node-service.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>The code for processing the server side API for Node.js. This file
                            is no longer maintained.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="prettydiff.com.xhtml">prettydiff.com.xhtml</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>Actual Pretty Diff tool HTML file.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="prettydiff.js">prettydiff.js</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>Actual Pretty Diff application code.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                    <tr>
                        <td><a href="api/prettydiff.wsf">prettydiff.wsf</a></td>
                        <td><a href="http://prettydiff.com/">Austin Cheney</a></td>
                        <td>Pretty Diff API for Windows Script Host.</td>
                        <td></td>
                    </tr>
                </tbody>
            </table>
            <p>Please send comments, feedback, and requests to
                <a href="mailto:austin.cheney@us.army.mil">austin.cheney@us.army.mil</a>.</p>
        </div>
        <script src="prettydiff.js" type="application/javascript"></script>
        <script src="api/dom.js" type="application/javascript"></script>
    </body>
</html>